INGREDIENTS
 
US Customary
Metric
 
1x
2x
3x
▢1 cup salted butter* softened
▢1 cup white (granulated) sugar
▢1 cup light brown sugar packed
▢2 tsp pure vanilla extract
▢2 large eggs
▢3 cups all-purpose flour
▢1 tsp baking soda
▢½ tsp baking powder
▢1 tsp sea salt***
▢2 cups chocolate chips (or chunks, or chopped chocolate)
INSTRUCTIONS
 
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F. Line a baking pan with parchment paper and set aside.
In a separate bowl mix flour, baking soda, salt, baking powder. Set aside.
Cream together butter and sugars until combined.
Beat in eggs and vanilla until fluffy.
Mix in the dry ingredients until combined.
Add 12 oz package of chocolate chips and mix well.
Roll 2-3 TBS (depending on how large you like your cookies) of dough at a time into balls and place them evenly spaced on your prepared cookie sheets. (alternately, use a small cookie scoop to make your cookies).
Bake in preheated oven for approximately 8-10 minutes. Take them out when they are just BARELY starting to turn brown.
Let them sit on the baking pan for 2 minutes before removing to cooling rack.


VIDEO
Best Chocolate Chip Cookies
The Best Chocolate Chip Cookie Recipe
Play Video
NOTES
Recipe information calculated based on this recipe making 36 cookies - 2 TBS of dough a piece)
Do not over bake
When you remove the cookies from the oven they will still look doughy. THIS is the secret that makes these cookies so absolutely amazing! Please, I beg you, do NOT over bake!
Ingredient Substitutions
Butter. I use salted butter, but unsalted butter would also be great. I just recommend tasting the dough to ensure that it's salted to your liking.
White Sugar.  You can use granulated white sugar or organic cane sugar.
Brown sugar. I use light brown sugar in this recipe for the best results.
Flour. I recommend using an unbleached, all-purpose flour to make these chocolate chip cookies. Many readers have used gluten-free all-purpose flour with excellent results. 
Sea Salt. I exclusively bake and cook with pure, fine sea salt. Sea salt is different than table salt (that is iodized), so if you use salt other than sea salt I recommend testing the recipe first with ½ tsp and then adjusting to your taste.
Chocolate Chips. As you can see from the photos, sometimes I use chocolate chunks, chopped chocolate, or chocolate chips. It doesn't matter what you use, as long as you use 2 cups.
How to freeze chocolate chip cookie dough
Portion dough, roll into balls and freeze in a single layer in an airtight container for up to 2 months. 
Note on the amount of flour in grams - the traditional conversion from cups to grams is 120 g all-purpose flour in 1 cup, which would mean this recipe needs 360 g flour. When I weigh the flour I use to make the perfect cookies it comes out to be 430 to 450 g depending on the size of my eggs. I suggest starting with 360 and increasing as necessary. The dough should not be wet or sticky but it also should not be dry or crumbly.
