This process is essentially removing the wheel in reverse! Be sure to rest the chain on the right cog on the cassette (photo: Step 3). It has to go on the cog that it was on when you took the wheel off. This should be the smallest cog, but sometimes you might forget to shift down there first before you remove the wheel — and if that’s the case, you’ll want to shift the shift lever several times BEFORE trying to put the wheel back on to make sure the derailleur is in the right place.

Then, assuming you're right handed, you can usually stand next to the bike so that you’re on the left side at the back of the bike. Hold the bike off the ground by the seat, while you hold the rear wheel with your right hand. Move slightly so you can look down at the rear wheel and frame. You should be able to sort of manipulate the wheel so that the small cog goes into the loop in the chain (between the upper and lower runs). Wiggle the wheel so that it fits into the dropouts on the frame. You might have to reach down and tap the quick release sideways to free one end, which may have gotten stuck, or to make some clearance. Or, the quick release might have closed and you’ll need to open it.

Also, be sure the brake quick release is open (photo: Step 2), because the wheel won’t fit easily, if at all, if it’s not. With a little practice, you should be able to get the wheel in without ever touching the chain.

For bolt-on wheels (held on with nuts; no quick release). If you’re dealing with axle nuts instead of a quick release, you need to manipulate the washers so that they’re outside the dropouts, not inside. It’s also important when tightening the wheel to only snug the right nut, then snug the left. Then go back and add a little more tension on the right nut, then the left (or the left and then the right), etc. until the wheel is tight. That’s the safe way to tighten a wheel with axle nuts because it prevent changing the bearing adjustment, which can happen if you just tighten one nut all the way without equally snugging the other.

FINAL STEP: Make sure the wheel is centered in the frame and fastened tightly. The final and most important step is to make certain that the wheel is securely engaged in the frame (not just partially inserted because it can come loose when riding causing a crash), and that the wheel is centered in the frame both at the brake (top) and at the chainstays (bottom). The brake may drag if the wheel is out up top and the tire could rub if it’s misaligned at the bottom. So double-check and get it right.
