WHEEL INSTALLATION
The wheels must be properly mounted to the bicycle frame. Misalignment can result in problems with shifting and bike handling. If the wheel is not securely mounted in the dropouts, it may come out when the bike is ridden, possibly causing injury to the rider.

Solid axle hubs use axle nuts outside the dropouts. The axle nut will have a washer built into the nut, or a separate washer. If the washer has teeth or knurling, these face the dropout to help secure the wheel. Lubricate the axle threads while the wheel is off the bike.

It is often easiest to install the front wheel when the bike is standing on the ground. The quick-release skewer must be fully engaged on the dropout surfaces. By placing the bike on the ground, the axle will be fully up in the dropouts.

1. Check that the quick-release skewer lever is in open position and that brake quick-release mechanism is open.
2. Install the wheel into the dropouts. Make sure the hub is fully seated in the frame or fork. On a rear wheel, first pivot the derailleur back and place the smallest cog between the upper and lower sections of chain. Guide the wheel between the brake pads and engage smallest cog on chain.
3. Tighten the wheel:
Quick-release: tighten the axle so that the lever meets resistance at 90° from the frame or fork.
Thru axle: slide the axle in place and turn clockwise until tight.
Solid axle: tighten both axle nuts to manufacturer’s recommended torque.
Use of a torque wrench is recommended. However, if none is available, one can use perceived effort. For 25Nm of force, apply about 40 lbs. of pressure to the end of a 5″ wrench.
4. Determine final closing position of lever. Rotate front lever and adjusting nut so the lever will end up just in front of fork. Position the rear lever so it falls between the chain stay and seat stays. Reposition the lever as necessary if it will not fully close.
Place front lever just in front of fork blade when possible
Align rear lever between chain and seat stays

5. Re-engage brake release mechanism, if applicable.
6. Verify that wheel is centered in frame or fork. Open skewer or loosen axle nuts and adjust as necessary to center wheel in frame, and re-tighten.
Use frame/fork as reference to determine that wheel is centered.
7. Verify that rim brake pads are centered to the wheel and adjust as necessary.
