3 dried chipotle chiles, stemmed and seeded
2 dried guajillo chiles, stemmed and seeded
2 dried ancho chiles, stemmed and seeded
2 cups chicken broth
1 dinner roll, torn into pieces
2 corn tortillas, cut into 1-inch strips
5 tomatillos, cut in half crosswise
2 tomatoes, cut in half crosswise
1 tablespoon lard
1 onion, halved and thinly sliced
½ head garlic, peeled and sliced
⅓ cup chopped peanuts
¼ cup raisins
2 tablespoons cumin seeds
1 tablespoon dried thyme
6 whole allspice berries
5 whole cloves
3 cinnamon sticks
1 cup chicken broth
5 ounces dark chocolate, coarsely chopped
3 tablespoons white sugar
1 teaspoon salt
ADD ALL INGREDIENTS TO SHOPPING LIST 
DirectionsInstructions Checklist
Step 1
Toast chipotle, guajillo, and ancho chiles in a dry pan over medium heat, stirring constantly, until warm and aromatic, about 3 minutes. Transfer to a blender.

Step 2
Heat 2 cups chicken broth in a saucepan until it begins to simmer, about 5 minutes. Pour broth into the blender.

Step 3
Toast dinner roll pieces and tortilla strips in a dry pan over medium heat, stirring constantly, until lightly browned, about 3 minutes. Transfer to the blender with chicken broth and chiles.

Step 4
Allow the chiles, toasted bread, and tortillas to soak, fully submerged, in the chicken broth until softened, about 10 minutes. Blend the mixture until smooth.

Step 5
Cook tomatillos and tomatoes in a dry skillet on medium-high heat until soft and blackened, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Place tomatoes in the blender with the chile puree.

Step 6
Melt lard in a large skillet over medium heat. Stir in onion, garlic, peanuts, raisins, cumin seeds, thyme, allspice berries, cloves, and cinnamon sticks; cook and stir until onions are soft and golden, 5 to 8 minutes. Remove the cinnamon sticks and other whole spices; add onion mixture to the blender with the chile-tomato mixture and blend until smooth.

Step 7
Pour chile puree into a large saucepan over medium heat. Stir in 1 cup chicken broth, chocolate, sugar, and salt. Bring mixture to a simmer; stir until chocolate is melted and sauce is thickened and slightly reduced, 10 to 15 minutes.
