500 g (4 cups) all-purpose (plain) flour, plus extra for dusting

220 g (scant 1 cup) water at 50°F (10°C)

50 g (3 1/3 tablespoons) liquid sourdough starter (or 13 g 1 1/2 tablespoons dry sourdough starter)

20 g (2 tablespoons) fresh baker's yeast, crumbled

10 g (2 teaspoons) sea salt

70 g (1⁄3 cup) sugar

1 egg (50 g), plus 1 lightly beaten egg for glazing

25 g (2 tablespoons) softened butter, plus 250 g (generous 1 cup) chilled butter

Method
Kneading in a stand mixer

Put the flour, water, starter, fresh yeast, salt, sugar,
and 1 egg in the bowl. Knead for 5 minutes at low speed, then for 2 minutes at high speed. Add the softened butter and knead for another 3 minutes.

Kneading by hand Put the flour on a work surface or in a mixing bowl and make a large well in the center. Add the starter, fresh yeast, salt, sugar, egg, and the softened butter, then pour in half the water. Mix well, then add the remaining water and blend until all the flour has been incorporated. Knead the dough until it becomes smooth and elastic.

Shape the dough into a ball and put it in a bowl. Cover with a damp cloth and refrigerate for 1 hour.

Take the chilled butter out of the refrigerator and place
it between 2 sheets of parchment (baking) paper. Soften, by lightly running a rolling pin over it, and gradually shape it into a rectangle.

Dust the work surface. Use a rolling pin to roll out the chilled dough to a 12 × 24- inch (30 × 60 -cm) rectangle, 1⁄8 inch (3 mm) thick. From time to time, lift the dough off the work surface to check its size. Roll out the butter to fit one half of the dough rectangle. Lift the butter onto the dough and fold the other half of the dough over it. Turn the dough 90 degrees, so that the opening is to the right.

Roll out the dough again to create a 12 × 36- inch (30 × 90 -cm) rectangle. Fold this rectangle into thirds, brushing off any excess flour as you go, if necessary. Wrap the dough in plastic wrap (cling film), and make an indentation with your fingertip in one corner to indicate that you have made one turn. Refrigerate for 1 hour.

Dust the work surface and take the dough out of the refrigerator. Repeat the previous step, rolling the dough to a 12 × 36- inch (30 × 90 -cm) rectangle and folding it in thirds. Wrap in plastic wrap and make 2 indentations with your fingertips to indicate a second turn. Refrigerate for 1 hour.

Again, roll out the dough again to create a 12 × 36- inch (30 × 90 -cm) rectangle. Fold this rectangle into thirds. Wrap the dough in plastic wrap and make 3 fingertip indentations to indicate a third turn. Refrigerate for 1 hour.

Dust the work surface. Unwrap the dough and roll it out neatly to a long 131⁄2 x 22-inch (34 x 55-cm) rectangle, 1/16-1⁄8 inch (2-3 mm) thick. Try to make it as straight and even as you can, trimming the edges to neaten, if need be. Fold the dough in half lengthwise, then unfold it and cut it in

2 along the length of the fold.

Carefully lift 1 piece of dough to sit neatly on top of
the other. Use a large knife to cut out triangles. Use a 4-inch (10-cm) dough cutter as a guide for the length of the triangle bases, with sides 7 inches (18 cm) long. Since the dough is in 2 layers, you will get 2 layers of triangles.

Roll up the croissants, working from the base to the point. The point should ultimately rest underneath so that it does not unfold during baking. Throughout this process
the dough triangles should remain well chilled; otherwise, it will be impossible to roll them. If they soften too much, return them to the refrigerator.

Arrange the croissants on wire racks covered with parchment (baking) paper. Leave to proof for 2-2½ hours. (You could place the racks in a cold oven, which then becomes a proofing chamber. Remove them before preheating the oven.)

Place a baking sheet on the bottom shelf of the oven
and preheat to 325°f (170°c). Glaze the croissants with lightly beaten egg. Just before putting the croissants in the oven, pour 50 g (scant ¼ cup) of water onto the preheated baking sheet. Bake for 15 minutes.

Remove from the oven, transfer the croissants to another wire rack, and leave to cool.
